[WIP] Clean up polymiddleware (#5566)
microsoft/BotFramework-WebChat: docs/MIDDLEWARE.md

Middleware operates in a cascading sequence, where the execution order plays a critical role. An upstream middleware can influence whether and how the downstream middleware renders. Middleware can perform the following operations:

- Add new UI
- Remove existing UI
- Replace existing UI
- Decorate existing UI

## What is polymiddleware?

Polymiddleware is our unified architecture for middleware. All middleware will be passed to a single `polymiddleware` prop.

```tsx
function MyChatUI() {
  const polymiddleware = useMemo(
    () => [
      createActivityPolymiddleware(
        next => request =>
          request.activity.type === 'event'
            ? // Handle rendering of event activity thru <EventActivity activity={request.activity}>.
              reactComponent(EventActivity, { activity: request.activity })
            : // Continue rendering.
              next(request)
      )
      createActivityPolymiddleware(...),
      createActivityPolymiddleware(...),

      // Handle rendering of error box.
      createErrorBoxPolymiddleware(...)
    ],
    []
  );

  return (
    <ReactWebChat
      polymiddleware={polymiddleware}
      // ... other props ...
    />
  );
}
```

> > Legacy middleware, such as `activityMiddleware`, are polyfilled to `polymiddleware` automatically until they reached end of support. See [this section for deprecation dates](#when-will-legacy-middleware-removed).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Legacy middleware, such as `activityMiddleware`, are automatically converted (polyfilled) to `polymiddleware` until the end of support. See [this section for deprecation dates](#when-will-legacy-middleware-removed).
```

   })
];
```

## Features

### Using the new `<XXXPolymiddlewareProxy>`

Every type of polymiddleware now comes with its corresponding proxy component. It is the easiest way to render a polymiddleware.

> The proxy component acts as an intermediary, forwarding request to the polymiddleware. The polymiddleware processes the request and returns a render function, which the proxy will morphs into the final rendered output.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The proxy component acts as an intermediary, forwarding request to the polymiddleware. The polymiddleware processes the request and returns a render function, which the proxy will morph into the final rendered output.
```

```tsx
const ActivityPolymiddlewareProxy: ComponentType<{ readonly activity: WebChatActivity }>;
```

The following code demonstrates using `<ActivityPolymiddlewareProxy>` to render an activity.

<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
```tsx
function MyComponent({ activity }: { readonly activity: WebChatActivity }) {
  return <ActivityPolymiddlewareProxy activity={activity} />;
}
```
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->

Refer to [this section](#when-to-use-usebuildrenderxxxcallback-vs-xxxpolymiddlewareproxy) to determine whether to use the hook or the proxy component.

### Mixing polymiddleware with legacy middleware

> Notes: legacy middleware is deprecated and will be removed on or after 2027-08-16.

> The following code snippet a legacy activity middleware followed by polymiddleware.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following code snippet shows a legacy activity middleware followed by polymiddleware.
```

```tsx
const MyActivity = memo(function MyActivity({ request }) {
  return <div className="polymiddleware">{request.activity.text}</div>
});

const polymiddleware = [
  // Legacy activity middleware
  createActivityPolymiddlewareFromLegacy(() => next => request => {
    const child = next(request);

    return () => <div className="legacy">{child?.()}</div>;
  },
  // Polymiddleware handling activity request
  createActivityPolymiddleware(next => request => activityComponent(MyActivity, { request }))
];
```

For a message activity of "Hello, World!", it will render:

```html
<div class="legacy">
   <div class="polymiddleware">Hello, World!</div>
</div>
```

> ## Behaviors

Reviewer: Maybe
```suggestion
## Behavior and Deprecation
```

### When will legacy middleware be removed?

> We introduced polymiddleware in 2025-08-16. Based on our 2-year deprecation rule, legacy middleware will be removed on or after 2027-08-16. The following table should deprecation dates for various legacy middleware.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We introduced polymiddleware in 2025-08-16. Based on our 2-year deprecation rule, legacy middleware will be removed on or after 2027-08-16. The following table shows deprecation dates for various legacy middleware.
```

- Middleware is officially called the ["chain of responsibility" pattern](https://refactoring.guru/design-patterns/chain-of-responsibility)
   - Unique characteristics in Web Chat: bidirectional, synchronous, allow early termination
   - The economy of middleware/chain-of-responsibility in plain English
      - "In Web Chat, result is a render function"
      - "Handler process a request and return a result"
      - "Enhancer is a handler working in a chain: it process the request, pass it to the next enhancer to process, when it return, process it again, and then return"
      - "Middleware initialize the chain of enhancers"
      - "`applyMiddleware()` compile middleware back to a single handler"
- Allowing middleware to override request improves flexibility but also impact debuggability
   - A bug in a middleware within the chain can cause havoc
      - For instance, a middleware might alter the activity content before passing it downstream, potentially causing unexpected behavior
- Middleware should return render function than a React component

>    - Impossible to set a dynamic value as a default (bound) prop value in React component without wasted rendering and various performance issues

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - Impossible to set a dynamic value as a default (bound) prop value in a React component without causing unnecessary rendering and performance issues
```

### Polyfilling legacy middleware

Legacy middleware passed to deprecating props such as `activityMiddleware` will be upgraded to polymiddleware automatically and placed after other polymiddleware passed via the `polymiddleware` prop. In other words, legacy middleware has lower priority than polymiddleware.

Special polymiddleware factory functions such as `createActivityPolymiddlewareFromLegacy()` allow input of legacy middleware and output as polymiddleware. This helps the transition period. However, these special factory functions is also marked as deprecated.

### Why `createActivityPolymiddlewareFromLegacy()` accepts an array of legacy middleware instead of one?

Polymiddleware enforces immutability of requests, which differs from the behavior of legacy middleware.

When multiple legacy middleware are passed as an array to `createActivityPolymiddlewareFromLegacy()`, they are combined into a single polymiddleware. This allows requests to be modified between legacy middleware, provided they are part of the array.

### When to use `useBuildRenderXXXCallback()` vs. `<XXXPolymiddlewareProxy>`?

> Their main differences:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The main differences are:
```

- `useBuildRenderXXXCallback()` allows precise render control
   - Developers can control how the render function is being used and what to do if the polymiddleware decided not to render the activity
- `<XXXPolymiddlewareProxy>` always render an element
   - If the polymiddleware decided not to render, the proxy will still render an empty/headless element (function component returning `null`)

### Priorities in polymiddleware

> > Priorities is used internally and will not expose as a feature.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Priorities are used internally and are not exposed as a feature.
```
